Depleted Uranium(DU) is a metallic material that is found and utilized after the Second World War. As a by-product of production of nuclear reactor fuel, DU is easily accessible for military and weapon production organization for many developed and developing countries. Due to its excellent characteristic in material strength and penetration capability as ammo arounds, it is heavily used by the military around the word and had its stage in the Gulf War. However, the famous material has its drawback. Due to its chemical toxicity, it is frequent that DU material will harm military personnel that comes in contact with it. The purpose of this report is to introduce the basic characteristic of DU, the usage of it and the controversy about utilization of the DU material.

Depleted uranium is uranium with a lower content of the fissile isotope U-235 than natural uranium. Most depleted uranium arises as a by-product of the production of enriched uranium for use as fuel in nuclear reactors and in the manufacture of nuclear weapons. Enrichment processes generate uranium with a higher-than-natural concentration of  uranium isotopes with the bulk of the feed ending up as depleted uranium, in some cases with mass fractions of U-235 and U-234 less than a third of those in natural uranium. DU emits less alpha radiation than natural uranium. DU from nuclear reprocessing has different isotopic ratios from enrichment–by-product DU, from which it can be distinguished by the presence of U-236.

 Uses of DU take advantage of its very high density of 19.1 g/cm3 (68.4% denser than lead). Military uses include armor plating and armor-piercing projectiles. DU is favored for armor penetrator because it is self-sharpenning and flammable. When on impact with a hard target , the nose of the round fractures in a way that is remains sharp. The impact also release the heat that is neccessary to inflame the marterial. When the DU penetrator reaches in an armord vehicle as it combust, it will often ignite the ammo and the crew within the vehicle, causing massive damage to the unit. And at the same time , because of its high density, DU is also favored as vehicle armor, especially for main battle tanks, usually sandwiched between traditional armor metal.  For instance, some late-production M1A1HA and M1A2 Abrams tanks built after 1998 have DU modules integrated into their Chobham armor, as part of the armor plating in the front of the hull and the front of the turret, and there is a program to upgrade the rest.
 
 However, the use of DU is not without its hazard. Although Depleted Uranium is a radioactive material, due to its long half-life, the primary radiation produced by DU is alpha and beta radiation that can largely blocked by the human skin or clothes. While gamma rays a a form of hightly pentrating energy, the amount of  gama radiation emiteed by DU is very low that it does not add much to the background radiation. However, DU is a type of heavy metal(not the Metallica type), and heavy metal (e.g. uranium, lead, tungsten) have chemical toxicity property, and will cause long-term adverse health effect leading to severe organ failure when introduced into the human body in large amount. One of the main approach of such introduction is inhalation. The aerosol or spallation frangible powder produced by impact and combustion of depleted uranium munitions can potentially contaminate wide areas around the impact sites, leading to possible inhalation by human beings. 
 
 In conclusion, Due to the outstanding material characteristic of depleated Uranium, it is likely that DU will remain to be  widely used in military equipments and ammunitions and the demand of it apparantly will only increase. However, the adverse effect of utilizing said material is too large to be ignored and controversy will not aid in further implementation of DU. The future of DU remain to be determined.
